---
layout: default
title: Planning and installation
parent: Systems in organisations
grand_parent: IB DP Core
nav_order: 3
---
Core
{: .label .label-blue }

# Planning and system installation

### 1.1.1 - Identify the context for which a new system is planned.

Some other stuff in here.

### 1.1.2 - Describe the need for change management.

Objective: 2

Students should understand there are a number of factors that need to be managed to ensure change is successful.

S/E The way that change is managed can have significant effects on employers and employees.

### 1.1.3 - Outline compatibility issues resulting from situations including legacy systems or business mergers.

Objective: 2

INT, S/E When organizations interact, particularly on an international basis, there may be issues of software compatibility and language differences.

### 1.1.4 - Compare the implementation of systems using a client’s hardware with hosting systems remotely.
<div>
<dl>
<dt>Objective</dt>
<dd>3</dd>
<dt>Teacher Notes</dt>
<dd>INT, S/E, INT, AIM 8</dd>
<dt></dt>
<dd>The remote host may be in a different time zone and this can have significant effects on end-users.</dd>
</dl>
</div>

3	The benefits and drawbacks of SaaS (Software-as-a-Service) should be considered.
			S/E, INT, AIM 8 The remote host may be in a different time zone and this can have significant effects on end-users.

### 1.1.5 Evaluate alternative installation processes.

3	Students should be aware of the methods of implementation/ conversion.
			Parallel running, pilot running, direct changeover and phased conversion.
			S/E Training issues may require organizations to restructure their workforce.
1.1.6 	Discuss problems that may arise as a part of data migration. 	3	INT These include incompatible file formats, data structures, validation rules, incomplete data transfer and international conventions on dates, currencies and character sets.
1.1.7 	Suggest various types of testing. 	3	The crucial importance of testing at all stages of implementation should be emphasized, with the stages clearly defined.


## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

Planning and system installation
 |Assessment statement |Obj |Teacher’s notes
1.1.1 |Identify the context for which a new system is planned. |2|The extent and limitations of a new system should be appreciated.
|||Organizational issues related to the installation of new systems such as user roles, underlying technologies.
1.1.2 |Describe the need for change management. |2|Students should understand there are a number of factors that need to be managed to ensure change is successful.
|||S/E The way that change is managed can have significant effects on employers and employees.
1.1.3 |Outline compatibility issues resulting from situations including legacy systems or business mergers. |2|INT, S/E When organizations interact, particularly on an international basis, there may be issues of software compatibility and language differences.
1.1.4 |Compare the implementation of systems using a client’s hardware with hosting systems remotely. |3|The benefits and drawbacks of SaaS (Software-as-a-Service) should be considered.
|||S/E, INT, AIM 8 The remote host may be in a different time zone and this can have significant effects on end-users.
1.1.5 |Evaluate alternative installation processes. |3|Students should be aware of the methods of implementation/ conversion.
|||Parallel running, pilot running, direct changeover and phased conversion.
|||S/E Training issues may require organizations to restructure their workforce.
1.1.6 |Discuss problems that may arise as a part of data migration. |3|INT These include incompatible file formats, data structures, validation rules, incomplete data transfer and international conventions on dates, currencies and character sets.
1.1.7 |Suggest various types of testing. |3|The crucial importance of testing at all stages of implementation should be emphasized, with the stages clearly defined.
|||Types of testing can include: user acceptance testing, debugging, beta testing.
|||Students should be aware that there are programs that can test other programs, thereby automating parts of the testing process and reducing costs.
|||S/E Inadequate testing can reduce employee productivity and lead to end-user dissatisfaction.
User focus
1.1.8 |Describe the importance of user documentation. |2|S/E The quality of user documentation can affect the rate of implementation of the new system.
1.1.9 |Evaluate different methods of providing user documentation. |3|Examples should include methods such as: help files, online support and printed manuals.
|||S/E The quality of user documentation can affect the rate of implementation of the new system.
1.1.10 |Evaluate different methods of delivering user training. |3|Examples should include self- instruction, formal classes, remote/ online training.
|||S/E The quality of the delivery of user training can affect the rate of implementation of the new system.
System backup
1.1.11 |Identify a range of causes of data loss. |2|Causes include malicious activities and natural disasters.
|||S/E Malicious activity may be a result of activities by employees within the organization or intruders.
1.1.12 |Outline the consequences of data loss in a specified situation. |2|S/E Loss of medical records, cancellation of a hotel reservation without the knowledge of the traveller.
1.1.13 |Describe a range of methods that can be used to prevent data loss. |2|These should include failover systems, redundancy, removable media, offsite/online storage.
Software deployment
1.1.14 |Describe strategies for managing releases and updates. |2|Students should be aware of a variety of ways in which updates and patches are made available and deployed. This includes automatic updates received on a regular basis online.
|||S/E, INT Performance issues related to the inability to install updates may hinder end-users and reduce compatibility between systems in geographically diverse locations.

---

[Planning and system installation](1-1-1)

[Link to another page](another-page).

# 1.1   Systems in Organisations

* Part 1

---

# Objectives

* planning and system installation
* identify context for planned new system
* need for change management
* compatibility issues - legacy systems/business mergers
* client hardware vs. remote hosting, installation processes
* problems of data migration, types of testing
* user focus
* user documentation, user training
* system backup
* causes and consequences of data loss, prevention
* software deployment
* strategies for managing releases and updates

---

# New System

* de nova
* no existing computer system
* hardware, peripherals, network, software, environment
* ? ‚Äúcleaner‚Äù
* relatively expensive
* new software
* individual, SaaS, combination
* user documentation, user training, support, customisation
* maintenance
* hardware compatible/capable
* usually management driven
* goals - overt and covert

---

# New System

* new hardware
* user training, support
* knock-on upgrades, network, peripherals, software
* maintenance
* remember
* ‚Äúsystem‚Äù includes people - users, sys admins, techs, ‚Äústakeholders‚Äù, consumers of output
* planning
* requirements
* task and workflow analysis
* top-down often problematic
* helps if users on board

---

# Potential Issues

* loss of data when transferring between systems
* accidental deletion
* think it's been transferred - delete old - it hasn't
* file recovery software
* misplacement
* can't find it after the move
* unsaved data
* terminating process without saving first
* data corruption with transfer
* incompatible data types
* new system uses software that can't read files from old system

---

# Abstraction

* concept of ignoring details
* deal with only the information needed for the task.
* use this all the time
* e.g. a switch turns a light on or off
* works at an abstracted level
* pays no attention to the details of:
* how the switch, bulb or wiring work
* where the electricity comes from etc.
* advantage of this:
* if the wiring is changed, or a bulb changed from incandescent to LED, it does not change the way you switch the light on and off

---

# Abstraction

* in general computing abstraction is:
* ‚Äúthinking and working at a level that is ‚Äòzoomed out‚Äô so you only consider issues at a high level‚Äù
* e.g. designing a graphical user interface
* you lay out the content - data fields, buttons, menus,  etc.
* pay no attention to the details of:
* how the fields will be populated
* what the code behind the buttons will be
* what the exact options in the menus will be etc.
* in object orientated programming (OOP)
* abstraction hides details of a class from other objects that use it
* in Java - declare a class abstract or interface
* after that programmer has to extend that class to instantiate the object

---

# Encapsulation

* applies to OOP mainly
* less widely referred to outside of this
* process of combining data and functions into a single unit called a class so that the internal representation of an¬†object¬†is generally hidden from view outside of the object's definition
* typically, only the object's own methods can directly inspect or manipulate its fields - so the attributes of the class are kept private and public ‚Äúget‚Äù and ‚Äúset‚Äù methods are provided to manipulate these attributes
* benefit of encapsulation is that it can reduce system complexity, and thus increase¬†robustness, by allowing the developer to limit the inter-dependencies between software components

---

# Change Management

* tech changes often used as catalyst/excuse for:
* change in work practice
* restructuring
* redundancy
* pushing political agendas
* often different agendas in different groups
* need to identify true motives or bewildering process
* may be internally resourced or outsourced
* advantages and disadvantages of each

---

# Change Management

* internal
* insider knowledge
* may face political or other constraints
* smaller overt cost
* real cost often masked
* outsourcing
* may be used to cut through internal politics
* independent opinions
* additional skills
* economy of scale

---

# Design Models

---

# Design Models

---

# User Centred Design

---

# Versioning Software Systems

* software development versioning
* version x.x.x
* pre-release usually designated version 0.x.x
* subsequent releases  1.0, 2.0  etc.
* major releases "version releases"
* increment the number  1  to  2  etc.
* usually used for breaking changes
* updates "point releases"
* increment the point  1.0  to  1.1  etc.
* traditionally don't make any breaking changes
* minor updates or patches
* increment the second point  1.2.0  to  1.2.1  etc.
* typically security updates

---

# Versions/Testing

* alpha
* pre-release version
* main functionality there but not complete
* unstable - data safety not implied
* alpha testing
* usually in-house
* beta
* may be released as beta
* all functionality present - will still have bugs
* stability not guaranteed
* beta testing
* done by group of users - usually volunteers
* "ecologically valid"
* valuable feedback and bug detection

---

# Reporting Bugs

* crash reports
* usually handled by OS
* send OS company crash report with technical details
* +/- copy to developer
* viewed through console
* bug report systems
* email developer
* open-source usually do submission via version control system
* e.g. github

---

# Crash Report

* crash reports
* usually handled by OS
* send OS company crash report with technical details
* +/- copy to developer
* bug report systems
* email developer
* open-source usually do submission via versioning system e.g. github

---

# Updating Systems

* could be done as a direct change-over or as phased conversion
* direct changeover
* old software and hardware is completely replaced by the new in one move
* everyone in the organisation has same software/hardware- no compatibility issues
* if it goes wrong affects everyone
* phased conversion
* only one section has direct changeover
* other sections changed when the first section selected running well
* less risky than a direct changeover
* problems identified early and dealt with before everyone affected


# 1.1   Systems in Organisations

* Part 2

---

# Case Study St Leonards School

* How many users?
* Who are the users?
* Can you categorise the users?

---

# Case Study St Leonards School

* different categories of user
* students - decide how granular the categories need to be
* senior school IB + GCSE
* senior school MYP
* junior school
* staff
* teaching
* admin - may need subcategories here e.g. financial, clerical
* IT/sysadmin
* more peripheral e.g. estates, catering
* other - e.g. guests, visitors
* better to be fine grained at start - can always group sub-categories together later

---

# User Profiles

* idea is to develop a model of the users of the system
* user models should include demographic data
* can be used to help:
* ensure all requirements are included
* evaluate specification to ensure all requirements covered



# 1.1   Systems in Organisations

* Part 3

---

# Objectives

* identify a range of causes of data loss
* including malicious activities and natural disasters
* malicious activity may be a result of activities by employees within the organisation or intruders
* outline the consequences of data loss in a specified situation
* loss of medical records, cancellation of a hotel reservation without the knowledge of the traveller
* describe a range of methods that can be used to prevent data loss
* including failover systems, redundancy, removable media, offsite/online storage

---

# Edinburgh University South Bridge 2002

* building at 80 South Bridge ... was used by some 300 people daily for teaching and research, and was the primary base for some 200 staff and students
* 100 members of staff and PhD students
* 40 Masters students
* 65 Senior Undergraduate Students (years 3 and 4)
* tutorial and laboratory space for a further 220 Junior Undergraduate Students.
* lost over 150 workstations, a cluster of powerful servers, and associated infrastructure.
* lost the Artificial Intelligence Library - a collection of AI literature unique in the world, an irreplaceable archive accumulated over the 40 years of Edinburgh's leadership in the field, since its beginning in the 1960s.
* many researchers have lost their personal archives

---

# Edinburgh University South Bridge 2002

* building at 80 South Bridge ... used by about 300 people daily for teaching and research
* primary base for 200 staff and students
* 100 members of staff and PhD students
* 40 Masters students
* 65 Senior Undergraduate students (years 3 and 4)
* tutorial and laboratory space for a further 220 Junior Undergraduate students
* lost over 150 workstations, a cluster of powerful servers, and associated infrastructure
* lost the Artificial Intelligence Library - a collection of AI literature unique in the world, an irreplaceable archive accumulated over the 40 years of Edinburgh's leadership in the field, since its beginning in the 1960s
* many researchers lost their personal archives

---

# Data Loss

* accidental deletion
* "natural" disasters
*  human disasters
* hardware failure
* provider deletes data
* mistaken belief in backup
* often unpublicised
* disaster recovery strategy

---

# Data Loss

* malicious activities
* ransomware
* WannaCry NHS attack
* data theft
* conceal trail
* prevent warnings
* "prank"/spite
* insider vs. outsider
* Wikileaks
* Edward Snowden
* human error - sending data to the wrong person
* data loss prevention technologies (DLP)
* e.g. look for patterns of data access - departing employee

---

# Data Loss

* malicious activities
* ransomware
* WannaCry NHS attack
* data theft
* conceal trail
* prevent warnings
* "prank"/spite
* insider vs. outsider
* Wikileaks
* Edward Snowden
* human error - sending data to the wrong person
* data loss prevention technologies (DLP)
* e.g. look for patterns of data access - departing employee

---

# Specific Examples

* National Audit Office (NAO) report on the WannaCry attack May 2017
* affected at least 81 of the 236 trusts across England - estimated 48 directly rest indirectly
* 27 were acute care trusts
* locked out of devices
* cancellation of thousands of appointments and operations
* also locked out medical equipment e.g. MRI scanners and lab machines
* more than 1,200 pieces of diagnostic equipment were infected
* even more devices put out of use after being disconnected from IT systems to prevent the infection spreading
* Department of Health unable to provide NAO with a figure on the number of organisations that had access to information restricted due to the attack
* Microsoft - T-Mobile - 2009
* 800,000 Sidekick user's data lost

---

# Failover

* = switching to a redundant or standby system (server/system/hardware component/network on failure/abnormal termination of previously active application
* usually where continuous availability and a high degree of reliability needed
* computer - server or network - router/DNS server
* failover when automatic - known as switchover when manual
* "automated with manual approval" - runs automatically once human approves
* "heartbeat" system
* connects two servers through separate cable
* as long as regular polling is successful - "pulse" maintained - second system remains offline
* failback = the process of restoring system/component/service in failure back to original, working state
* standby system goes back to standby

---

# Redundancy

* = duplication of critical components or functions of a system
* to increase the reliability of the system
* usually backup or fail-safe
* to improve system performance
* e.g.         global navigation satellite system (GNSS) receivers
* multi-threaded computer processing
* safety-critical systems e.g. fly-by-wire/hydraulic systems in aircraft
* some parts of the control system may be triplicated (triple modular redundancy (TMR))
* sub components are expected to fail independently
* occasionally produces less reliability ‚Äì creates more complex system - prone to various issues
* human neglect/complacency
* higher production demands - overstress production system - make it less safe

---

# Other Measures

* use of removable media
* off-site storage
* online/cloud-based storage
* Rick Rescorla - Morgan Stanley - WTC 9/11
* Aukland, New Zealand - 1998 - 5 weeks
* four 110¬†kV power cables - 2 each connecting to two central city substations
* 2 were 40-year-old gas-insulated cables past their replacement date
* 1 failed on 20 January - unusually hot and dry conditions
* second to same substation failed on 9 February
* due to the increased load from failure of the first cables - remaining two cables failed on 19 and 20 February
* entire central city supplied by a single 22 kV cable
* 20 city blocks losing all power
* 60,000 of the 74,000 people who worked in the area worked from home or from relocated offices in the suburbs
*  6,000 apartment dwellers in the area had to find alternative accommodation

---

# Other Measures

* use of removable media
* off-site storage
* online/cloud-based storage
* Rick Rescorla - Morgan Stanley - WTC 9/11
* Aukland, New Zealand - 1998 - 5 weeks
* four 110¬†kV power cables - 2 each connecting to two central city substations
* 2 were 40-year-old gas-insulated cables past their replacement date
* 1 failed on 20 January - unusually hot and dry conditions
* second to same substation failed on 9 February
* due to the increased load from failure of the first cables - remaining two cables failed on 19 and 20 February
* entire central city supplied by a single 22 kV cable
* 20 city blocks losing all power
* 60,000 of the 74,000 people who worked in the area worked from home or from relocated offices in the suburbs
*  6,000 apartment dwellers in the area had to find alternative accommodation
